# borda-method-eval

## Table of Contents
1. [Repo Overview](#repo-overview)
2. [Preference Profile Conversion](#preference-profile-generation)
3. [Initial Winners](#initial-winners)
4. [Compromise](#compromise)
5. [Majority-Condorcet Winner](#Majority-Condorcet-Winner)
6. [Majority-Condorcet Loser](#Majority-Condorcet-Loser)
7. [Spoiler Effect](#Spoiler-Effect)
8. [Truncation](#truncation)

---

## Repo Overview
This repo contains the python script used to evaluate various Borda methods across more than 400 elections.
Ballots were provided by Otis D. at [https://dataverse.harvard.edu](https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/AMK8PJ).

---

## Preference Profile Generation
Preference profiles were generated by taking each election ballot (See [Example Election Ballot](Example_Election_Ballot.csv)) and ordering the candidates while removing duplicates and write-in wherever possible. Then each permutation of candidates existing in the ballots were counted up to produce our Preference Profiles (See [Example_Preference_Profile](Example_Preference_Profile.csv)). The script used to convert ballots to preference profiles can be found here: [PreferenceProfileConverter](Python_Scripts/PreferenceProfileConverter.ipynb). Small tweak may have been make on a ballot by ballot basis to ensure that all of the ballots were regularized.

---

## Initial Winners
To determine the winner of each election we developed and algorithm that would determine the winner with normal Borda and Borda variants (See [BordaWithEquity](Python_Scripts/BordaWithEquity.ipynb)).

---

## Compromise
Compromise Voting failures were evaluated by finding the inital winner. Then we checked if a losing candidate could win if enough people "compromised" to vote for that candidate. To do this we check if the given losing candidate was more prefered than the winning candidate in each row of the preference profile. If so, we would move the losing candiate to the top rank of that row and shift the other non winning candidates down. If the winner changed to the losing candidate, then a compromise failure could have occured. Repeating this process for all losing candidates.
(See [CompromiseBordaEval](Python_Scripts/CompromiseBordaEval.ipynb))

---

## Majority-Condorcet Winner
For these we simply checked all Borda variants to determine if the person who won by that method was the condorcet or majority winner.
(See [CondorcetEvalAndBorda](Python_Scripts/CondorcetEvalAndBorda.ipynb))

---

## Majority-Condorcet Loser
For these we simply checked all Borda variants to determine if the person who won by that method was the condorcet or majority winner.
(See [Condorcet-MajorityLoserEval](Python_Scripts/Condorcet-MajorityLoserEval.ipynb))

---

## Spoiler Effect
To check for spoiler effect failures, we first found the initial winner. Then we ran the election with every combination of candidates including the winner and at least one other candidate to see if the winner would change. If the winner changed, then a spoiler effect failure could have occured.
(See [SpoilerEffectBordaEval](Python_Scripts/SpoilerEffectBordaEval.ipynb))

---

## Truncation
To check for truncation failures, we first found the initial winner. We would then pick losing candidate, then truncate each ballot if that ballot prefered the loser over the winner. The truncation would involve labeling the winning candidate and all candidates ranked below the winner as being skipped. If the winner changes to the losing candiate, then a truncation failure could have occured. Repeating this process for all losing candidates.
(See [TruncationBordaEval](Python_Scripts/TruncationBordaEval.ipynb))

---
